---
title: Dissertation published in NeurIPS workshop!
created: 18 Jan 2023
---

On my course at UCL, I decided to focus on machine learning. 

There were some partners matched by UCL, but none of them seemed to have particularly mature products, or even clearly identified datasets. I reached out to an organisation, Open Climate Fix, and they were happy for me to use their wonderful open source datasets for a dissertation, and they gave me some useful pointers. 

I decided my focus would be on whether convolutions were able to capture time-dependency as well as LSTMs. 

The project went pretty well and my supervisor suggested we send it to a NeurIPS workshop, and it was accepted and published [here](https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/neurips2022/58)! You can see the code and the report [here](https://github.com/bndxn/dissertation). 

**Does explicit time series modelling improve short-term solar photovoltaic energy forecasts?**

Anthropogenic climate change has caused more frequent and more intense weather events. Reaching levels of warming in the next few decades above 1.5C would increase multiple hazards and lead to significant humanitarian harms. Reducing emissions in line with climate goals requires the rapid integration of low carbon energy sources into the electricity grid. Solar photovolatics (PV) convert light to energy using solar panels. They are a low carbon energy source but the energy they produce can be uncertain due to clouds in the sky obscuring the sun’s energy, making it difficult to integrate them into electricity grids. Solar PV forecasting between 30 minutes and 8 hours is used to help anticipate peaks and troughs in demand to support grid integration.

This dissertation explores different machine learning approaches to time series forecasting of sequences using a dataset of UK satellite imagery and solar PV energy readings over a 1- to 4-hour time range. Convolutional neural networks, or CNNs, were developed for image processing, but can also be used for dealing with sequences as a block. Recurrent neural networks, or RNNs, such as long short-term memory (LSTM) models, deal explicitly with sequences by carrying forward state information. This report assesses whether explicitly representing the task as a recurrent time series rather than using a three-dimensional convolution leads to greater predictive accuracy.

Weather forecasting includes both stochastic (e.g. clouds) and deterministic (e.g. brightness) features, which should work well in an LSTM architecture due to the combination of long- and short-term information. This report finds that convolutional and recurrent models tend to perform slightly better than purely convolutional models, most significantly when taking satellite images as input, perhaps because they contain relevant long-term information. This dissertation also explores the prediction errors, CNN activations, and estimates the carbon emissions generated by and averted by the use of different model architectures. Finally, it considers the implications for machine learning and solar PV forecasting more generally. The code for the project is made available open source in the appendix.

This dissertation seeks to use satellite imagery to predict solar photovoltaic (PV) yield - the energy from solar panels, using satellite images. I combine two data sources: satellite images and PV energy readings.